Assyria was the region located in the ancient Near East which, under the Neo-Assyrian Empire, reached from Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) 
through Asia Minor (modern Turkey) and down through Egypt. The empire began modestly at the city of Ashur (known as Subartu to the
Sumerians), located in Mesopotamia north-east of Babylon, where merchants who traded in Anatolia became increasingly wealthy and that 
affluence allowed for the growth and prosperity of the city.
According to one interpretation of passages in the biblical Book of Genesis, Ashur was founded by a man named Ashur son of Shem, 
son of Noah, after the Great Flood, who then went on to found the other important Assyrian cities. A more likely account is that the city 
was named Ashur after the deity of that name sometime in the 3rd millennium BCE; the same god's name is the origin for `Assyria'. 
The biblical version of the origin of Ashur appears later in the historical record after the Assyrians had accepted Christianity and so it 
is thought to be a re-interpretation of their early history which was more in keeping with their newly-adopted belief system.
The Assyrians were a Semitic people who originally spoke and wrote Akkadian before the easier to use Aramaic language became more popular.
Historians have divided the rise and fall of the Assyrian Empire into three periods: The Old Kingdom, The Middle Empire, and 
The Late Empire (also known as the Neo-Assyrian Empire), although it should be noted that Assyrian history continued on past that point;
there are still Assyrians living in the regions of Iran and Iraq, and elsewhere, in the present day. The Assyrian Empire is considered the
greatest of the Mesopotamian empires due to its expanse and the development of the bureaucracy and military strategies which allowed it 
to grow and flourish.

His son and successor Shalmaneser I completed the destruction of the Mitanni and absorbed their culture. Shalmaneser I continued his
father’s policies, including the relocation of populations, but his son, Tukulti-Ninurta I (c. 1244-1208 BCE), went even further.
According to Leick, Tukulti-Ninurta I,
...was one of the most famous Assyrian soldier kings who campaigned incessantly to maintain Assyrian possessions and influence. 
He reacted with spectacular cruelty to any sign of revolt. (177)


Stela of Shalmaneser I

He was also very interested in acquiring and preserving the knowledge and cultures of the peoples he conquered and developed a more 
sophisticated method of choosing which sort of individual, or community, would be relocated and to which specific location. Scribes 
and scholars, for example, were chosen carefully and sent to urban centers where they could help catalogue written works and help with
the bureaucracy of the empire. A literate man, he composed the epic poem chronicling his victory over the Kassite king of Babylon and 
subjugation of that city and the areas under its influence and wrote another on his victory over the Elamites.
He defeated the Hittites at the Battle of Nihriya in c. 1245 BCE which effectively ended Hittite power in the region and began 
the decline of their civilization. When Babylon made incursions into Assyrian territory, Tukulti-Ninurta I punished the city 
severely by sacking it, plundering the sacred temples, and carrying the king and a portion of the populace back to Assur as slaves. 
With his plundered wealth, he renovated his grand palace in the city he had built across from Assur, which he named Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta, 
to which he seems to have retreated once the tide of popular opinion turned against him.
His desecration of the temples of Babylon was seen as an offense against the gods (as the Assyrians and Babylonians shared many of the
same deities) and his sons and court officials rebelled against him for putting his hand on the goods of the gods. He was assassinated 
in his palace, probably by one of his sons, Ashur-Nadin-Apli, who then took the throne.
